FL training (e.g., ocean or wilderness monitoring stations)
 unstable terrestrial connections with central servers,
satellite connectivity enables them to quickly acquire knowledge
from multiple peers, improving their local training.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
However, despite its promise, FL within satellite-assisted ter-
 networks remains largely unexplored. This is a

 that requires the meticulous design of transmission
tailoredtotheintrinsiccharacteristicsofsatellitenetworks,
 well as the effective utilization of satellite transmissions to
 the various performance challenges posed by system
heterogeneity. Firstly, the limited contact time and bandwidth of
satellite networks?particularly in the uplink?signicantly con-
strain the delivery of parameters. Secondly, ground devices typi-
cally operate in highly diverse environments, characterized by
data heterogeneity, varying terrestrial network conditions, and dif-
fering local computing power. These system heterogeneities nota-
bly degrade model performance and present a primary challenge
that satellite assistance must effectively address.
1
satellite-assisted FL paradigm and its main challenges, which
will explore in greater detail in the next section.
addressthesechallenges,weproposeasatellite-assistedFL
 for resource-constrained and heterogeneous environ-
namedSatFed.InSatFed,eachedgedevicetrainsaperson-
 model for local inference while also contributing to global
 training. Global model updates occur asynchronously
 devices and the server via terrestrial networks, whileexchangepersonalizedmodelspeer-to-peerthroughsatel-
 networks for mutual guidance. SatFed utilizes freshness-
 queues for parameter transmission over bandwidth-
 satellite networks, ensuring that devices receive the
 up-to-date peer models. Additionally, a multigraph with
three edge types is employed to dynamically capture diverse
heterogeneities between devices, optimizing the local utilization
of peer models received from satellite networks. The three edge
types are  similarity edges, which help devices learn from peers
with similar data distributions;  connection edges, which enable
devices to benet from peers with superior terrestrial bandwidth;
  computation edges, which monitor differences in device
updatespeedsandadjustthelocallearningrateaccordingly.
key contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. WhilesatellitenetworksofferapotentialsolutiontothecongestionandcoveragelimitationsoftraditionalterrestrialFL,their efciency presents major challenges
from inherent satellite network constraints and FL system heterogeneity. w/: with.
ourknowledge,SatFedisapioneeringefforttoharnessLEO
networksfor
FLwithintraditionalterrestrial
networks.Ittacklesthedistinctivetransmissioncharacteristics
of satellite networks by implementing model freshness queues,
effectively mitigating the challenges posed by constrained
bandwidth on satellite-assisted performance.
investigate innovative solutions for addressing system
heterogeneity in satellite-assisted terrestrial communication
frameworks, employing a multigraph to monitor real-time
model transmissions within satellite networks and capture intri-
systemheterogeneities. Through meticulous design of local
updates, the multigraph-guided integration of satellite-
transmitted models markedly improves training performance.
implementtheSatFedprototypeusingactualLEOsatellite and datasets. Comprehensive experiments demon-
itscapacity to achieve efcient and robust FL with satel-
lite assistance across various heterogeneous conditions.
Motivation
thissection,wepresentempiricalmeasurementsthatunder-
 the challenges inherent in satellite-assisted FL, thereby
strengthening the motivation for the design of SatFed.
C
s
network transmission
satellites
 periodically, engaging in bidirectionaldata
transmission when within range of ground devices, and are pri-
constrainedbytheirbriefcontacttimesandlimiteduplink
bandwidth.Forinstance,satellites orbiting at an altitude of 700 km
complete one orbit approximately every 100 min, with contact
windows to ground devices lasting only about 10 min [
Asillus-
trated in
2
we assess parameter-transmission efciency
theseeetingcontactperiodsusing the Starlink LEO satel-
lite communication system.
presentsthecumulativedis-
 function (CDF) derived from Iperf [
a widely used
measurementtool,revealinganaveragedownlinkrateof
approximately100megabitspersecond(Mbps)andanuplink rate
of around 12 Mbps. For example, downloading a 98 Mb ResNet-50
model [
from the satellite to each device takes about 8 s,
 uploading the model back to the satellite requires more
than a minute. Thus, the principal bottleneck in satellite network
transmission lies in the uplink direction.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al.
Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
2. TheuplinkintheLEOsatellitenetworkrepresentsasignicanttransmissionbottleneck.(a)Ourexperimentalsetup;(b) the resulting cumulative distribution function
(CDF) showing the satellite network speed. Mbps: megabits per second.
an ideal scenario, each connection between a device and a
satellite involves extensive model exchanges
(as detailed further
3.2
However,duetolimitationsinuplinktransmission
thesuccessfultransmissionofmodels(typicallyfewerthan
inourResNet-50case)is signicantly constrained. Thus, prior-
itizing critical models for satellite transmission is essential to opti-
mize satellite-assisted performance.
Dataheterogeneity
performance of satellite-assisted FL is signicantly
 by data heterogeneity, as devices distributed globallydatafromdiversecontexts.These devices exhibit non-
independent and non-identically distributed (non-IID) data, result-
ing in varied local optimization objectives [
Consequently,
updatesfromdifferentdevicesarebiasedtowardtheirlocal
distributions.Directlyaveraging these updates?as is done in
the widely used FL method FedAvg [
leadstosuboptimal
performance.Tobetterunderstandtheimpactofdata
 on training, we conducted experiments with the ResNet-50
model using FedAvg at varying levels of heterogeneity, as shown
3
[
The results clearly indicate that performance
signicantly as data heterogeneity increases.
Moreover, relying solely on a single global model can lead to
 challenges across devices. To investigate this issue, we
evaluated each device?s local test accuracy under various heteroge-
neous conditions, as shown in
3
[
(wherethedashed
represents the average). It is evident that, as heterogeneity
theglobalmodelexhibitsgreaterperformancevariance
devices,signicantlyreducingfairness.Althoughextensive
research has been conducted on the impact of data heterogeneity
on FL, most studies focus on PS communication frameworks [
donotadapttoemerginghybrid satellite?terrestrial network
architectures.
3. Theimpactofdataheterogeneity.(a)Heterogeneity levels; (b) fairness. The CIFAR-100 dataset [
isdistributedamongtenedgedevices,withlocallabelsfollowinga
Dirichlet distribution; a smaller value of

indicates greater heterogeneity [
Theexperimentalparameters are consistent with
4
ID: identication;
balancing
Bandwidthheterogeneity
networks
 provide
 bandwidth than
 networks, but they are subject to variability and hetero- due to factors such as uctuating user volumes, routing
conditions, and regional infrastructure disparities [
Devices
inremoteareasorcongestedenvironments(a.k.a.,strag-
experience longerdelays in parameter transmission,which
 turn slows down their local updates and ultimately hampers
training performance. To better understand the impact of band-
width heterogeneity on FL, we conducted experiments with vary-
ing proportions of stragglers.
4
shows that, as the
proportion of stragglers increases, FL experiences signicantly convergence and a marked deterioration in accuracy. As
shown in
4
excludingoutdatedmodelupdatesfromaggre-
 partially alleviates performance degradation but still falls
 of the ideal. This comparison emphasizes that up-to-date
models effectively extract local knowledge, while outdated models
can negatively impact the system?s performance.
t
n
satellitesandextensivecoveragein
 constellations can enable edge devices to acquire timely
knowledgefrommultiplepeersduringperiodsofgroundnetwork
 or disconnection, thereby mitigating the issue of out-
dated local updates. However, effective design to address the strag-
gler problem in such a specialized and hybrid network architecture
remains largely understudied.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
4. Theimpactofbandwidthstragglers.(a)Stragglerratios;(b)damagefromstragglers.Localupdateswereasynchronouslyaggregatedtoformandevaluate the global
model. Stragglers have a 90% chance of communication blockage or disconnection with the server, retrying every
Computationheterogeneity
challengeinsatellite-assistedFLfromthediffer-
ence in computing capabilities among devices [
Certain
areundertrainedduetoinsufcientcomputationalpower
 the same local update cycle. We conducted experiments
to investigate how this uneven training in local updates across
devices affects FL. As shown in
5
[
thetestaccuracyof
global modelsignicantlydecreases as thenumberof under-
trained devices increases. It should be noted that, as illustrated
5
[
theimbalanceinthemodelupdatesresultingfrom
heterogeneitycanbemitigatedbyraisingthelearn- rate for undertrained devices. Increasing the learning rates
for normal devices does not improve performance, emphasizing
that the improvement in performance comes from balancing
update scales.
ndings show that the peer-to-peer communication
ofsatellitenetworksisconducivetoedgedevicespromptly
 the model update scales of their peers and adjusting
 learning rates accordingly to ensure that all edge devices
 with relatively consistent scales. However, in a hybrid
satellite-assisted FL framework, strategies for the real-time and
precise perception of peer update scales and the corresponding
adjustment of local learning rates to achieve optimal performance
require careful design.
Frameworkdesign
this section, we elaborate on the SatFed framework and its
well-designed components.
Theimpactofuneven(a)Undertrainedratios;(b) balance effect. The local update period is set to
withnormaldevicesa compute power of
operationspersecond(GFlops;performanceof a Raspberry Pi 4 Model B [
whileundertraineddevices have only
that.ThemodelisResNet-50
with a batch size of
balance(scaleanti-balance)increasesthelocallearning rates of undertrained (normal) devices by
Preliminariesandoverview
consider a typical scenario of a LEO-satellite-assisted FL.
Each edge device
itsown private dataset
distribution
theinput featuresand
corresponding labels, and
the number of devices. Devices
share a model
However,asoutlinedin
2.2
thismodel
 effectively accommodate the diverse local data

ofalldevices.Therefore,
utilizepersonalizedmod-
els for local inference on device. The optimization objective
follows state-of-the-art FL methods using personalized models
where all devices are trained
 the FedAvg framework
to update the global model
using it to guide their own
personalized model updates:
1
t

min

 1
the empirical loss
to both models
dataset
theoutput of model
input
ahyperpa-
rameter, and
regulates
 parameter distance between the personalized model and the
model,achievingeffectivejointtraining. It is widely adopted
in state-of-the-art personalized FL methods [
27
SatFed,localupdatesoftheglobalmodelareasynchronously
 to the server for aggregation via the terrestrial net-
work. Simultaneously, personalized models are transferred peer
to peer through the satellite network in a decentralized manner.
.
y ,
i m
y D

 f

x y
enotes t
he expectation operator
personalized model training is guided by both the global
model and the peers? personalized models.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al.
Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
employsamodelfreshness-basedpriority-transmission
 enabling edge devices to obtain more up-to-date models
 peers in bandwidth-limited satellite networks. In addition,
employsamultigraphthatcapturesmultipleheterogeneity
relationshipsinrealtimeusingmodelstransmitted in the satellite
network. This in turn aids in distilling knowledge from cached peer
models to ensure the performance and robustness of local updates.
A system overview of the SatFed framework is illustrated in
6
Satellitenetworktransmission
thetransmissionofa satellite network with
satellites,
Kisthenumber of satellites), and device
model caches
respectively,forstoringperson-
modelsfrom various devices. As depicted in
6
whena
connectstoaLEOsatellite,ituploadsmodelsviatheuplink.
satellitethentransmitscachedmodelstoedgedevicesthrough
the downlink as it passes overhead. However, the intricate topol-
ogy and stringent bandwidth constraints of satellite networks, as
discussed in
2.1
present signican
 challenges to naive
 transmission?that is, to directly incorporating satellite
communication into FL without any targeted design.
Drawbacksofnaivetransmission
satelliteorbitswithmultiplesatellitesoperatingon
each, for each orbit
L is the number of the satellite
orbits), the set
theedgedevicesitcovers.When
two edge devices
simultaneouslybyorbit?
that is,
term them??satellite-network
direct,? which is denoted as
thedenotation
any device
also be simultaneously
bymultipleorbits, which is denoted as the orbit set
can be inferred that
the union
considertwonaivetransmission modes: When device
to satellite
eitheruploadsonlyits personalized device
 additionally uploads all cached peer models
former method restricts satellite
orbit
only which limits device
receiving models
solely from devices in
causing transmission bias.
As shown in
7
evenwithanaverageLEOsatelliteorbitcov-
upto ten devices and increasing the number of orbits to
mayreceivefewerthanhalfofthepeermodels,resultingin
 bias in collaborative knowledge distribution. The second
eliminatesthisbiasbyallowingsatellitestoreceive

fromotherorbits.However,itsignicantlyincreasesthetrans-
loadontheuplinkofthesatellitenetwork and introduces
a substantial number of redundant transmissions. When the same
model is transmitted to another device through multiple orbits,
redundant transmission occurs, consuming the highly limited
bandwidth resources of the satellite network. As shown in
7
as the number of orbits and coverage increases, this
redundancy becomes increasingly severe, wasting tens of times
the bandwidth resources.
6. SystemoverviewoftheSatFedframework.L

localsupervisedlearning;L

globalmodelguidancefrom the terrestrial network; L

: peer model guidance
from the satellite network.
Modelfreshnessandpriority queues
tackletransmissionbiasandredundancy,SatFedimplements
model-priority queues to prioritize the transmission of critical
 within the constrained bandwidth of satellite networks.
we dene the freshness of each model circulating in the
satellite network to indicate its level of obsolescence. Specically,
each time a device
thesatellite,ittimestampsthe
model as
upload initiation time. At
any current time
freshness of
denoted as
 that the closer the upload time
of the model
tothe current time
higheritsfreshnessis,
ahyperparametercontrollingthe outdated speed.
on freshness, device
upload and download
model-priority queues,
respectively,whenconnected
to satellite
the connection establishment time
compares the freshness and of cached peer
all
different moments before
If ,it
upload queue
it adds
the
m
L,
j
j
j m SatDir
i j
S
S
1 e
 t t
k
k
R
k
queue
a cache
amodel from device
is treated as
modelsinthequeuesarearranged
 descending order according to the freshness difference
Following the priority sequence in the
queues, device
subsequently uploads or downloads models,
 the corresponding outdated models in the recipient
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
7. Simulationofproblemswithnaivesatellite network transmission. (a) Transmission bias (average
differenttopology congurations, where
transmissionredundancy when device
the entire
connectingtothesatellite.Redundancyindicatestheratioofredundanttransmissions to the total
required transmissions of transmitted models to necessary ones.
SatFed tackles bias and redundancy in satellite network
transmission via priority queues.  If
notexistintherecip-
cacheor is extremely outdated, the sender positions
the
 of the queue for priority transmission, thereby maximizing
 alleviation of transmission bias.  If two different satellites
 to transmit personalized models from the same device
closeuploadtimestothesamerecipient,thesecondmodel,
having a minimal difference in freshness, is placed at
the end of
the transmission queue once the rst model is received. The sec-
ond model is transmitted only if the bandwidth is signicantly idle,
thus avoiding redundancy.
Heterogeneousmultigraph
addressthemultifacetedheterogeneity issues highlighted in
2
SatFedconstructsaglobalmultigraph,aimingtolever-
 model exchanges across satellite networks to capture the
 relationships between devices and ultimately guide local
updates. We document three types of heterogeneous relationships
to construct the multigraph
simi-
larity edges
connection edges
computation
detailsareas follows.
Similarityedges
describedin
2.2
diversedevicesexhibituniquelocal
 risks attributed to differences in training data
distribution. Similarity edges
toaiddevicesindiscerning
peermodelsobtainedfromthesatellitenetworkbetter align
with their optimization goals. Borrowing from state-of-the-art
methods [
we measure the similarity of local optimization
bycalculatingthecosine
ofmodelparameters
training.However,
satellitenetworkswheremodel fresh-
ness varies, simple cosine similarity may lead to inaccurate mea-
surements, necessitating freshness calibration. Therefore, we
compute the similarity edge
devices
con-
follows:
j 1
short,whentwomodels have similar freshness
the
 similarity accurately reects the similarity of their local
optimization objectives. Conversely, when their freshness differs
signicantly
thecosinesimilarityfailstoreecttheirdata
distribution accurately. The condence
the similarity
updates, as detailed in
3.3.4
Connectionedges
discussed in
2.3
terrestrial bandwidth stragglers
inrelativelyoutdatedmodels.Connectionedgeshelpstrag-
glers identify potential helpers. We monitor the communication
frequency
eachedge device
thePSoveraspeci-
ed time window
werecord the frequency
suc-
transmissionsofpersonalized models from devices
satellite networks. Subsequently, the connection edge is
denoted as follows:
j



 C
j
theweightbalancingthe two indicators.
if device
signicantly more exchanges with the server
than device
ashortperiod of time
Thissuggeststhat
relymoreon peer model
keepupwithglobaltrain-
ing pace. Moreover,
encourages
learn from more familiar
 easily accessible peer models, thereby reducing uctuations
in the convergence of the entire system.
Computationedges
mitigatetheglobalmodeldegradationcausedby the uneven
training mentioned in
2.4
we devise the computation
track the differences in update speeds across
therebyassistingin
compensating for undertrained ones.
We dene
theupdate speed of
theEuclideandistance
 parameters before and after the update, divided by the
time interval
thetime when
lastupdated):
t t
computed as the ratio of model update
speeds between different devices:
j
theupdate speed of
on
evaluates and compares the model
speedsofalledgedevicesandcanadjustthelocal learning
rate of undertrained models to prevent detrimental impacts on
global model aggregation.
Multigraphupdate
updatesof the multigraph
handledby
theser-
 and the devices
 are synchronized at the server side. At
occur
at time
any peer
the satellite network, replacing the locally cached
)
k
.
R




 .
A
i m
j
j
C
j
model
usingweightsbasedonthecondence
mentioned earlier:
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al.
Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
j














i j
condence
Additionally,device
recalculatesthe
oftimes it received
thetime window
update
subsequently adjusts
Eq.
Finally, we
compute and similarly calculate
updating
Eq.
Modeltraining
sectionelucidateshowSatFed leverages the multigraph
guidedevicesinextractingbenecialknowledgefromtransmit-
modelsinsatellitenetworks, thereby enhancing local updates
and improving training performance.
Peer-guidedmodel
SatFed, devices cache many peer models from the satellite
 but these models differ greatly in their usefulness for
local updates. Thus, using
calculate the weight
represents device
dependencyon peer model
local
Thisdependencyconformstotwoprinciples,in line with
the design goals of
Themoresimilartheirlocal
objectives,thestrongerthemutualdependency;and
 the more frequent the recent communication between device
theserver,andthe more often device
modelissentto device
stronger
dependency on
denedas
i j A

 j



i j
abalancing factor.
allpeer model
cache
therespec-
tive dependency
generate a peer-guided model
t
 i j
where is the cache size, and the exponential term diminishes
impact of outdated models in the cache.
short
asynthesisofpeermodelsthatareahead
globalupdateprogress and closely aligned with the optimization
goals of
Globalmodelupdate
SatFed,the global model
locallytrainedbydevices,with
parametersbeingtransmittedviatheterrestrialnetworkto
PSfor asynchronous updates. However, naive local updates result
in the uneven training mentioned in
2.4
signicantly
 model performance. We address this issue by using
dynamically adjust the local learning rate based on the
real-time peer model-update speeds. More specically, we use
denotetheaverageupdatescaleof peers
for each device
I
indicatesthat device
globallylag-
behind,anditslearningrateneedstobeincreased appropri-
ately for better global model aggregation.
SatFed establishes a dynamic adaptive learning rate
device
ln max 1 U
representsthegaincoefcient.Ifthe updating speed of
the global
device
learning rate
preset hyperparameter
otherwise,
logarithmically
with
eachroundoflocalupdates begins, device
thelatest global model
theserver.Itusesa learn-
ing rate
trainfor
ofgradientdescent on its dataset
obtainingthe updated
updatedmodelisthensentbackto
server for asynchronous aggregation with a xed weight
Personalizedmodelupdates
training of the personalized device model
guided by
both the global model
thepeer-guided model
should
 noted that, due to satellite assistance, local updates of
needto wait for
andcanproceedcontinu-
ously. The local objective for
asfollows:
1
the optimization objective consists of three components?
 supervised learning (L

 global model guidance from the
terrestrial network (L

), and peer model guidance from the
satellite network (L
ahyperparameter.
pseudocodedetailsofSatFed are provided in
1
Obviously, satellite transmission allows devices to promptly
 and evaluate model updates from peers, facilitating local
 and effectively mitigating the negative impact of system
heterogeneity on FL training. Without satellite communication,
devices with limited terrestrial bandwidth or computational power
severely degrade FL performance, as discussed in detail in
4.3
Notably,whileSatFedistailoredforterrestrialandsatel-
 networks, it offers insights into hybrid centralized/
decentralized FL frameworks in general.
1. SatFed.
Initialization:
executes:
foreach device
asynchronouslydo
2. Serversends
device
3. Device
5. Device
back {terrestrial}
7. Serverupdates
on
3.3.4
endfor
Build
on
3.4.1
Compute
on
3.4.1
foreach local epoch
1,2,..
5. Randomlyselectsa batch
endfor
return
Performanceevaluation
presentsnumericalresultstoevaluatethetraining
performanceoftheproposed SatFed framework and the effective-
ness of each individual component.
t
j
i j
t t
j
j ,
j ,
m


i j m
U
1 )
m
m
b
R
i i i
g
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
Experimentalsetup
implemented SatFed using Python 3.7 and PyTorch 1.12.1
traineditwithNVIDIAGeForce RTX 3090 graphics processing
units (GPUs). In the experiments,
devices were
deployed, along with
orbiting the Earth, dis-
tributed across
orbits.Weusedtwowidelyacclaimed
image datasets, Fashion-MNIST [
andCIFAR-100[
utilizing
Dirichletdistributiontogeneratenon-IIDlabel distributions for
the devices
andset the
to
stronglynon-
settings and to
independentidenticallydistri-
(IID)settings.Thedataquantities per device were randomly
assigned, ranging from
employed a ResNet-50
model with a size of
for CIFAR-100 (ResNet-18 for
Fashion-MNIST). An Adam optimizer [
was used, with the
learning rate
to
thebatchsize set to
loss
thecross-entropyloss.
torealLEO satellite networks [
eachsatelliteorbit
had an
operational cycle of
and covered approximately
edgedevices, with a contact time of about
perdevice.
bandwidthofthe satellite network was set to
forthe
 and 10 Mbps for the uplink as measured.
The local
update period was set to
Halfthedeviceshada compute
power of
(equivalenttoaRaspberryPi4Model
B), while
the others had only
that.Halfthedevicestypicallyoperated
under an
terrestrialnetworkbandwidth,while

hada90%chanceofcommunication blockage or discon-
necting from the server, retrying every
Overallperformance
this section, we
 the overall performance of the
 framework in terms of test accuracy and convergence
Inaddition,
assesstheimpact of satellite network trans-
mission on SatFed?s training. To investigate the advantages of
SatFed, we compare it with ve other benchmarks:
Theserver waits for all devices toreturn their model aggregates them into a new global model, and sends
it to devices to start the next round [
Theupdatedmodelsfromalldevicesareaggregated
into the latest global model in an asynchronous manner [
Eachdevicemaintainsapersonalizedmodel,trainsaglo-
usingFedAvg,andincorporates it to aid personalized
model updates with L2 regularization [
Ditto-Async: This asynchronous
 of Ditto
 the
global model following FedAsync.
): SatFed?s continuous local update method is without incorporating a peer guide model during
Theoverallperformanceof SatFed
8
testofSatFedcomparedwithother
 on the Fashion-MNIST
 CIFAR-10
 datasets.
and Dittoexhibitsignican
 slowerconvergence
 to
forbandwidth-stragglingdevicesduringeachglobalmodel
aggregation.Incontrast,FedAsyncandDitto-Asyncacceleratecon-
atthecostoftraininginstability,whichcanbeattributedthedegradationcausedbyoutdatedmodelsfromasynchronous
Itisevidentthat SatFed achieves the fastest convergence
among all benchmarks, facilitated by its connection edges, which
enable stragglers to learn from high-bandwidth peers via satellite
networks and thereby alleviate local model drag on the system
convergence progress. Moreover, SatFed achieves signicantly
higher test accuracy than the other benchmarks, thanks to its sim-
ilarity edges, which enable devices to selectively collaborate with
thathavesimilardatadistributions.Furthermore,thecom-
edgesadapttodifferencesinmodelupdatespeeds,guid-
theadjustmentoflocallearningratestomitigatethenegativeofuneven training on the global model. Notably, SatFed()
does not achieve the same performance as SatFed, suggesting that
peer guidance is the key to SatFed?s superior performance.
1
the converged accuracies and speeds for the
 and CIFAR-100 datasets. It is evident that SatFed
 higher test accuracies of 2.35% and 2.26% (1.07% and
1.01%) in the IID and non-IID settings on CIFAR-100 (Fashion-
MNIST) compared
with the other methods, with convergence
speeds up to
thanthoseofFedAvg.
fastcon-
 is mainly due to its satellite-assisted guidance from
high-bandwidth devices, which prevents personalized models
becomingoutdated.ComparedwithFedAvg(FedAsync),Ditto
(Ditto-Async) achieves better test accuracy in non-IID environ-
 with an average
improvement of 8.12% due to the use of
personalized models. Compared with Ditto-Async, SatFed effec-
tively enhances collaboration among similar peers, while also sens-
ing and compensating for uneven training, further improving
performance.
Theimpactofsatellite network transmission
9
theimpactofdifferentsatellitenetworktransmis-
modes on SatFed?s training performance. As described in
3.2.1
ifdevicesuploadonlytheirownmodels,theycanonly
 models from their satellite-network direct peers, leading
biasesthatunderminetheeffectivenessofpeer-guidedmodels. contrast, the redundant transmission mode involves devices
 all cached models to satellites, thereby mitigating bias peer-guided model knowledge sources. However, this results
 a surge in transmission loads, overwhelming the highly con-
 uplink links and causing massive model-upload failures.
It is evident that SatFed?s use of a freshness-priority model queue
leads to the best performance. This is because the queue prioritizes
the transmission of more critical models based on freshness in con-
strained satellite networks, ensuring overall model currency across
the satellite networks. Consequently, peer-guidance knowledge
remains up to date, resulting in training-performance
improvements.
Micro-benchmark
Similarityedges
10
illustratestheeffectofsimilarityedgesonthetrainingof
the CIFAR-100 dataset. Clearly, SatFed with
optimal
performancein
IID
non-IIDsettings.Remarkably,SatFed
demonstratesperformanceimprovementsoverDittoevenwithout
 edges. This result suggests that using the simply aver-
aged peer models from satellite networks as the peer-guided
stillbenecial,
toamodestextent.Thisimprove-
 is more signican
 in the non-IID scenario, reaching 1.17%,
 it is negligible in the IID scenario. This result is likely
 in the IID setting, the global model excels in knowledge
extraction, whereas its efcacy diminishes in the non-IID scenario,
necessitating supplementary knowledge from peers. A comparison
of SatFed?s accuracy with and without
that
similar-
 capture in
 transmissions within satellite networks
performanceby2.34%inIIDand1.92% in non-IID scenarios.
By mitigating the impact of outdated models on similarity updates
and effectively guiding
improvesthe perfor-
mance of local updates.
Connectionedges
11
the impact of connection edges on CIFAR-100
 training performance. A comparison of the training
performancewithand without
thattheedgeconnec-
impactismostsignicantintheearlystagesoftraining.At
point,alldevices?modelupdates are relatively similar. Models
with poor terrestrial bandwidth can learn directly from the faster-
progressing models through
accelerating

 However,
 the later stages, due to the impact of
 heterogeneity, the update directions of different devices
diverge signicantly, reducing the effectiveness of
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al.
Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
8. TestaccuracyfortheFashion-MNISTandCIFAR-100datasets underIIDandnon-IIDsettings. (a) Fashion-MNIST (IID); (b) Fashion-MNIST (non-IID); (c) CIFAR-100
(IID); (d) CIFAR-100 (non-IID).
1
testaccuracy(withdevicestandarddeviation)and speed of SatFed and other benchmarks.
accuracy(%)andspeed on the Fashion-MNIST
accuracy(%)andspeedon the CIFAR-100 dataset
? 5.07
? 4.65
? 4.39
?2.91
?4.67(5.66)
?3.40(3.39)
?5.91(12.89?)
?3.27(12.18?)
?4.50(1.08?)
?3.87(0.89?)
?5.16(3.39)
?3.17(1.31?)
?4.94(3.72)
?3.47(2.36)
?7.09(22.22?)
?4.32(10.91?)
)
?7.08(3.34)
?3.77(3.70?)
?8.14(25.72?)
?3.92(11.84?)
?3.02(13.82?)
?2.23(12.16?)
?5.23(100.60?)
?2.97(19.19?)
optimalvaluesareinbold.Speedisthereciprocaloftheratiobetweentheepochs needed to reach FedAvg?s converged accuracy and the epochs required by FedAvg itself.
9. Theimpactofsatellitenetworktransmissionmethodsontrainingperformance.(a)CIFAR-100(IID); (b) CIFAR-100 (non-IID). Bias and redundant transmissions are
detailed in
3.2.1
SatFedemploysthe freshness-priority queue scheme.
Connectionedges
12
the effect of computation edges on SatFed
training. Clearly, the assistance of
increasingthelearning

 undertrained models signicantly improves the perfor-
oftheaggregatedglobalmodelsinIIDscenarios.Although
 improvement in non-IID scenarios is less pronounced, it still
effectively increases the injection of global knowledge into person-
alized models. In summary, computation edges effectively improve
2
2
5
5
performance across both IID and non-IID settings. This
underscorestheabilitycomputationedgestocapture
ferences in local training progress and effectively address these dif-
ferences through learning rate adjustments.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
10. Ablationexperimentsforsimilarityedges.(a)CIFAR-100(IID);(b)CIFAR-100(non-IID).Toemphasizetheimpact of data heterogeneity, all edge devices are under
ideal bandwidth and computational conditions. w/o: without.
Ablationforconnectionedges.(a)CIFAR-100(IID);(b)CIFAR-100(non-IID).To highlight the terrestrial bandwidth heterogeneity, all devices train with
ideal computing power.
12. Ablation experiments for computation edges. (a) CIFAR-100 (IID); (b) CIFAR-100 (non-IID). To emphasize the impact of computation heterogeneity, all devices
operate within ideal terrestrial bandwidth.
Relatedwork
systemheterogeneityinFL,whichencompassesdata,band-
 and computation
 is a well-established eld
with various approaches. To address data heterogeneity chal-
lenges, Li et al. [
introduced personalized device models,
thefairness androbustness of the system. Smith et al.
adaptedmultitasklearningforpersonalizationbytreatingdif-
devices as distinct learning tasks. Ye et al. [
customized
aggregationweightsforeachdevicebymeasuringthesimilar-
betweenpersonalizedmodels.To tackle the issue of bandwidth
heterogeneity, Nguyen et al. [
maintainedabufferfortheaggre-
 of device updates, reducing the performance degradation
caused by outdated models. Wang et al. [
designed a cluster-
FL mechanism with hierarchical aggregation, balancing
communication resources by combining synchronous and asyn-
 aggregations. As for the uneven training issues caused
by computational heterogeneity, Diao et al. [
deployeddevice-
 local models adapted to match local computational
resources and designed their aggregation method accordingly.
existing methods t
 address FL system hetero-
 mainly focus on terrestrial PS communication architec-
 overlooking the potential offered by emerging hybrid
communicationpathwayssuchassatellite-assistedterrestrialnet-
works. This paper proposes novel solutions utilizing LEO-satellite-
assisted communication to tackle heterogeneity challenges, pre-
senting an orthogonal approach compared with the aforemen-
tioned methods.
Satellite?terrestrial
 are an emerging and promising
 architecture with signicant potential to alleviate terres-
trial network transmission bottlenecks and improve overall
transmission service quality [
Cui et al. [
utilized satellite
 to assist terrestrial IoT networks in reducing
latency.Dinget al. [
designeddynamictransmis-
 and computational resource optimization for dense LEO-
satellite-assisted mobile-edge computing. AlthoughLEO satellites
potentialtoassistinterrestrialcommunications,theexplo-
 of FL in satellite?terrestrial hybrid network architectures
 largely uncharted. This problem is non-trivial, requiring
the systematic design of model training, aggregation, and
transmission for hybrid network architectu
res, while addressing
satellite network topology, bandwidth issues, and various
heterogeneity challenges in FL training.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al.
Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
Conclusions
thispaper,weproposedSatFed,aresource-efcientsatellite-
 FL frameworkdesigned toenhance trainingperformance convergence speed in complex heterogeneous environments.
SatFeddesignsaprioritytransmissionqueuebasedonmodel
 differences, enabling devices in satellite networks with
 constrained transmission rates and complex topologies to
 near-real-time peer models. Furthermore, SatFed utilizes
 multigraph to perceive the heterogeneous relationships among
devices in real time, as indicated
by the models transmitted in
satellite networks. Finally, SatFed utilizes perceived heterogeneity
relationships by constructing peer guide models from satellite
transmission, thus directing local updates. Extensive experiments
showed that the SatFed framework outperforms state-of-the-art
benchmarks. This work underscores the potential of deploying
SatFed across real LEO-satellite-assisted terrestrial networks.
authorshipcontributionstatement
Zhang:Writing?originaldraft,Software,Methodology,
Conceptualization.ZhengLin:Writing?review&editing,Method-ZheWriting?reviewediting,Supervision,
 Zihan Fang: Investigation, Data curation. Xianhao Supervision. Wenjun Zhu: Resources, Data curation. Jin
 Project administration, Investigation. Yue Gao: Supervision,
Project administration.
ofcompetinginterest
authorsdeclarethattheyhavenoknowncompetingnan-
 interests or personal relationships that could have appeared
to inuence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgment
workwassupportedbytheNationalNaturalScience Foun-
dation of China (62341105).
J,RenJ,ZhangY,YueS,ZhangY. SESAME: a resource expansion and sharing
for multiple edge services providers. IEEE/ACM Trans Netw 2024;32
X,XuH,ZouL,DuanJ,WuC,XueY,etal.Rosevin:employingresource-
rate-adaptiveedgesuper-resolutionforvideostreaming.In:Proceedings
 the IEEE Annual Joint Conference: INFOCOM, IEEE Computer and
Communications Societies; 2024 May 20?23; New York City, NY, USA. New
York City: IEEE; 2024. p. 1?10.
J, Liu J, Zhang Y, Li Z, Lyu F, Wang Z, et al. An efcient two-layer task
 scheme for MEC system with multiple
services providers. In:
Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Communications; 2022 May 2?5;
online. New York City: IEEE; 2022. p. 1519?28.
T,LiA,ChenZ,WangH,LuoJ.AutoFed:heterogeneity-awarefederated
 learning for robust autonomous driving. In: Proceedings of the
AnnualInternational Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking;
2023 Oct 2?6; Madrid, Spain. New York City: Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM); 2023. p. 1?15.
L, Testa G. Scrutinizing the EU general data protection regulation.
A,FaticantiF,MarfoqO,NegliaG, Leonardi E. Federated learning under
and correlated client availability. IEEE/ACM Trans Netw
B, Moore E, Ramage D, Hampson S, Arcas BA. Communication-
learningofdeepnetworksfromdecentralizeddata.In:Proceedingsof
20th International
Conference on
Articial Intelligence and Statistics; 2017
Apr 20?22; Ft. Lauderdale, FL, USA. New York City: MLResearchPress; 2017.
A, Flocco M, Esposito F, Marchetto G. Owl:
 control with

networksviareinforcementlearning.In:Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications; 2021 May
10?13; online. New
York City: IEEE; 2021. p.
P,SkubicB,RostamiA,FioraniM,Monti P, Ghebreten-sa? Z, et al. Data
control architectures for 5G transport networks. J Lit Technol
D, Zhang W, Ye Q, Zhang C, Zhang N, Huang C, et al. DetFed: dynamic
for deterministic federated learning over time-sensitive
IEEETransMobile Comput 2024;23(5):5162?78
J, Kishk MA, Alouini MS. Space?air?ground?sea integrated networks:
coverage analysis. IEEE Trans Wirel Commun 2023;22
Z, Wu Q, Yu S, Li R, Zhang F, Chen X. FedLEO: an ofoading-assisted
learning framework for low Earth orbit
IEEETransMobile Comput 2024;23(5):5260?79
Y, Wu Q, Lai Z, Li H. Enabling low-latency-capable satellite?ground for emerging LEO satellite networks. In: Proceedings of IEEE

on Computer Communications; 2022 May 2?5; New York City,
NY, USA. New York City: IEEE; 2022. p. 1329?38.
T,
 A, Zhang Z, Chaudhry AU, Yanikomeroglu H. The digital
Canada and the role of LEO satellites in bridging the gap.
Mag 2022;60(6):24?30
Z, Li H, Wang Y, Wu Q, Deng
 Liu
 et al. Achieving resilient and
routinginspace?terrestrialintegratednetworks.In:
Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Computer Communications; 2023 May 17?
20; New York City, NY, USA. New York City: IEEE; 2023. p. 1?10.
P, Caini C, L?lf M. DTN LEO satellite communications
stations and GEO relays.
 Dhaou R, Beylot AL, Montpetit
Lucani D, Mucchi L, editors. Personal satellite services. Cham: Springer;
p. 1?12
speed test tool for TCP, UDP and SCTP [Internet]. Reims:
iKoula; [cited 2025 Jun 18]. Available from:
K,ZhangX,RenS,SunJ.Deepresiduallearning
image
In:
 of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition; 2016 Jun 27?30; Las Vegas, NV, USA.
New York City: IEEE; 2016.
p. 70?8.
T, Sahu AK, Zaheer M, Sanjabi M, Talwalkar A, Smith V. Federated
 in heterogeneous networks. In:
 of Machine
Learning and Systems 2; 2020 Mar 2?4; Austin, TX, USA. Indio: MLSys
Proceedings; 2020. p. 429?50.
S,LiB.Towardsoptimalmulti-modalfederatedonnon-IIDdata
 hierarchical gradient blending. In: Proceedings of IEEE Conference on
Computer Communications; 2022 May 2?5; London, UK. New York City: IEEE;
2022. p. 1469?78.
AZ, Yu H, Cui L, Yang Q. Towards personalized federated learning. IEEE
NetwLearn Syst 2022;34(12):9587?603
A, Hinton G. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny
Toronto:Universityof Toronto; 2009
Y,Xu
Xu
WangL,QianC.Adaptivecongurationforheterogeneous
 in decentralized federated learning. In: Proceedings of IEEE
Conference on Computer Communications; 2023 May 17?20; Hoboken, NJ,
USA. New York City: IEEE; 2023. p. 1?10.
E,DingJ,TarokhV.HeteroFL:computationandcommunicationefcient
federated learning for heterogeneous clients.
2020. arXiv:2010.01264.
PJ, Johnston SJ, Perkins CS, Garnock-Jones T, Tso FP, Pezaros D, et al.
singleboardcomputerclusters.
Future Gener Comput
2020;102:278?91
T,HuS,BeiramiA,SmithV.Ditto:fairandrobustfederatedlearningthrough
 In: Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on
Machine Learning; 2021 Jul 18?24; online. New York City: MLResearchPress;
2017. p.6357?68.
TC, Tran NH, Nguyen TD. Personalized federated learning with moreau In: Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems; 2020 Dec 6?12; Vancouver, BC, Canada. Red
Curran Associates Inc.; 2020. p. 21394?405.
R,NiZ,Wu
ChenS,WangY.Personalizedfederatedlearningwithinferred
 graphs. In: Proceedings of 40th International Conference on
Machine Learning; 2023 Jul 23?29; Honolulu, HI, USA. New York City:
MLResearchPress; 2023. p. 39801?17.
H, Rasul K, Vollgraf R. Fashion-MNIST: a novel image dataset for
benchmarking machine learning algorithms. 2017. arXiv:1708.07747.
DP,

 Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. 2014.
C,
 S, Gupta I. Asynchronous federated optimization. 2019.
Y. Zhang, Z. Lin, Z. Chen et al. Engineering 54 (2025) 115?126
V,ChiangCK,Sanjabi
TalwalkarAS.Federatedmulti-tasklearning.In:
 of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems; 2014 Dec
4?9; Long Beach, CA, USA. Red Hook: Curran
Associates Inc.; 2014. p. 4427?37.
J,MalikK,ZhanH,YousefpourA,RabbatM,MalekM,etal.Federated
withbufferedasynchronousaggregation.In:Proceedingsof The 25th
International Conference on Articial Intelligence and Statistics; 2022 Mar 28?
30; online. New York City: MLResearchPress; 2022. p.3581?607.
Z, Xu H, Liu J, Huang H, Qiao C, Zhao Y. Resource-efcient federated
withhierarchicalaggregation in edge computing. In: Proceedings of
the IEEE Annual Joint Conference: INFOCOM, IEEE Computer and
Societies; 2021 May 10?13; online. New York City: IEEE;
2021. p. 1?10.
Peng M,
 S, Lin G, Zhang
P. Integrated satellite?terrestrial
architectures, key techniques,
 experimental progress. IEEE
2022;36(6):191?8
G, Duan P, Xu L, Wang W. Latency optimization for hybrid GEO?LEO
networks. IEEE Internet Things J 2023;10(7):
C, Wang JB, Cheng M, Lin M, Cheng
J. Dynamic transmission and
optimization for dense LEO satellite assisted mobile-
computing.IEEETrans Commun 2023;71(5):3087?102
